for code= https://github.com/PranavDeshpande2004/AJP-code/tree/main/RMI_application

📌 Remote Method Invocation (RMI)

1. Architecture of RMI

Client-Server Model: RMI allows a Java object running in one Java Virtual Machine (JVM)
to invoke methods on an object in another JVM.

Components:
Client: Invokes methods on the remote object.
Server: Hosts the remote object.
Stub: Client-side proxy for the remote object.
Skeleton (Java < 1.2): Server-side proxy that dispatches calls to the actual object.
RMI Registry: Binds names to remote objects.
Remote Interface: Defines the methods that can be invoked remotely.

🔹 a. Application Layer
 Contains client and server programs.
 Client invokes methods on remote objects.
 Server provides implementations of remote objects.

🔹 b. Stub and Skeleton Layer (Proxy Layer)
Handles communication between client and server:
Stub (client-side): Acts as a proxy for the remote object. Marshals (converts) parameters and sends them to server.
Skeleton (server-side, pre-Java 1.2): Unmarshals request, calls the actual method on the remote object, and sends the result back.
🔸 In Java 2 and later, skeletons are replaced by reflection-based mechanisms.


🔹 c. Remote Reference Layer
Maintains references to remote objects.
Handles:
Object identity.
Invocation semantics (e.g., once-only call).
Reference creation and interpretation.

🔹 d. Transport Layer
Responsible for network-level communication.
Uses TCP/IP sockets to send data between JVMs.
Handles connection setup, listen, request/response.


✅ 4. Flow of a Remote Method Call
Client invokes a method on the stub.
Stub:
Marshals (converts) method arguments into a byte stream.
Sends request to the remote server via transport layer.

Skeleton (or reflective dispatcher in modern RMI):
Unmarshals data.
Calls the actual method on the remote object.
Remote object executes the method.
Result is marshaled and sent back to client.
Stub unmarshals the result and returns it to the client.

✅ 6. Advantages of RMI Architecture
Fully object-oriented (Java-based).
Allows pass-by-value and pass-by-reference semantics.
Handles complex object graphs.
Integrates easily with other Java technologies like JDBC, Servlets.


📌2. RMI Registry
1.The RMI Registry is like a telephone directory for remote objects in Java.
2.It helps clients find server-side objects by their unique names (bind names).
3.It’s a built-in name service in Java used for Remote Method Invocation (RMI).

✅ Key Points (with Simple Examples)
1.Acts like a Register Office:
When a server creates a remote object, it "registers" it in the RMI Registry using a unique name.
This name is called the bind name.

2.Client Finds Remote Object Using Name:
The client doesn't directly know where the object is or how it works.
exp:
Calculator obj = (Calculator) Naming.lookup("rmi://localhost/CalculatorService");

3.Works Like a Middleman:
The RMI Registry is a middleman between the server and the client.
It connects clients to the correct remote objects.
  
4.Location of Registry
It usually runs on the same machine as the server, but clients can access it remotely using the IP address.

5.Method:
bind(String name, Remote obj) – Registers a new object.
rebind(String name, Remote obj) – Replaces an existing one.
lookup(String name) – Client uses this to find the object.
unbind(String name) – Removes the object from the registry.


📌3. The RMI Programming Model
Define Remote Interface: Must extend java.rmi.Remote.
Implement Remote Interface: Must extend UnicastRemoteObject.
Register Object with RMI Registry.(Serevr side code)
Client lookup and call methods remotely.(Client side code)

📌4. Interfaces and Implementations
visit code-(refer PrintI.java and for implementations refer PrintC.java)

📌5. Writing Distributed Application with RMI
Create a remote interface.
Provide an implementation of the interface.
Compile the code and generate stubs.
Start the RMI registry.
Start the server to bind the object.
Create a client to lookup and invoke the method.

📌6.Naming Services
A naming service allows objects or resources to be identified by names instead of memory addresses or references.
In Java RMI, it helps clients locate remote objects using a logical name (bind name).
Method:
bind(String name, Remote obj) – Registers a new object.
rebind(String name, Remote obj) – Replaces an existing one.
lookup(String name) – Client uses this to find the object.
unbind(String name) – Removes the object from the registry.


📌7.Naming and Directory Services
A directory service is an enhanced naming service.
In addition to names, it allows storing attributes (metadata) about each object.
It provides search, browse, and filtering features.
Example: Search for a service by name, type, location, or other properties.
Extends naming to directory services (like JNDI - Java Naming and Directory Interface).
Allows association of names with resources in a hierarchical directory-like structure.
JNDI supports:LDAP, DNS, NIS, RMI registry, etc.
example=
Context ctx = new InitialContext();
DataSource ds = (DataSource) ctx.lookup("jdbc/myDataSource");

 📌 9. Remote Object Activation in RMI
Remote Object Activation allows remote objects to be loaded and activated on demand (i.e., lazy loading).
Instead of keeping remote objects running in memory all the time, they are activated when a client needs them.
It is a feature of RMI's activation system to save system  resources.

📌 Enlist – Roles of Client and Server in Java RMI
✅ Server Roles
Creates the remote object implementing the remote interface.
Exports the remote object to make it available for client invocation.
Registers (binds) the remote object with the RMI registry using a unique name.
Starts the RMI registry (if not already running).
Waits for client requests to execute remote methods.

✅ Client Roles
Looks up the remote object from the RMI registry using its bind name.
Obtains the reference (stub) of the remote object.
Invokes remote methods on the server object via the stub.
Handles remote exceptions (like RemoteException).
Uses only the remote interface, not the implementation.
